/*
 * Copyright (c) 2013 Zmanda, Inc.  All Rights Reserved.
 *
 * This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
 * modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
 * as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2
 * of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
 *
 * This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
 * WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY
 * or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
 * for more details.
 *
 * You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
 * with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
 * 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307 USA
 *
 * Contact information: Zmanda Inc., 465 S. Mathilda Ave., Suite 300
 * Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA, or: http://www.zmanda.com
 */

%perlcode %{

=head1 NAME

Amanda::Cmdfile - manage Amanda cmdfile

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use Amanda::Config qw( :getconf config_dir_relative );
  use Amanda::Cmdfile;

  my $conf_cmdfile = config_dir_relative(getconf($CNF_CMDFILE));
  my $cmdfile = Amanda::Cmdfile->new($conf_cmdfile);

  my $cmddata = Amanda::Cmdfile::Cmddata->new(
		operation      => $Amanda::Cmdfile::CMD_FLUSH,
		config         => get_config_name(),
		holding_file   => $hfile,
		host           => $hostname,
		disk           => $diskname,
		dump_timestamp => $dump_timestamp,
		storage        => $storage_name,
		working_pid    => getpid(),
		status         => $Amanda::Cmdfile::CMD_TODO);
  $cmdfile->add_to_memory($cmddata);
  if ($cmdfile->has_holding($hfile)) { ... }
  my $ids = $cmdfile->get_ids_for_holding($hfile);
  $cmdfile->write();


=head2 Cmdfile FUNCTIONS

Use these functions to read/update the cmdfile.

=over

=item C<new>

  my $cmddata = Amanda::Cmdfile::new($conf_cmdfile)

Open a cmdfile, lock the file.

=item C<write>

  $cmddata->writenew();

Write the cmdfile. Unlock the file.

=item C<unlock>

  $cmddata->unlock();

Unlock the file.

=item C<add_to_memory>

  $cmddata->add_to_memory($cmddata);

Add Cmddata to the in memory copy.

=item C<add_to_file>

  $cmddata->add_to_file($cmddata);

Add the Cmddata to the file, write, unlock and close it.

=item C<has_holding>

  $has_holding = $cmddata->has_holding($holding_file);

Return true if there is a command for the holding file.

=item C<get_ids_for_holding>

  $ids = $cmddata->get_ids_for_holding($holding_file);

Return a string of all command ids for the holding file.

=back

=head2 Cmddata FUNCTIONS

Use that function to create a Cmddata

=over

=item C<new>

  my $cmddata = Amanda::Cmdfile::Cmddata->new(
		operation      => $Amanda::Cmdfile::CMD_FLUSH,
		config         => get_config_name(),
		holding_file   => $hfile,
		host           => $hostname,
		disk           => $diskname,
		dump_timestamp => $dump_timestamp,
		storage        => $storage_name,
		working_pid    => getpid(),
		status         => $Amanda::Cmdfile::CMD_TODO);

Create a Cmddata

=back

=cut


%}
