/*
 * Copyright (c) 2009-2012 Zmanda, Inc.  All Rights Reserved.
 *
 * This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
 * under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as published
 * by the Free Software Foundation.
 *
 * This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
 * WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY
 * or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
 * for more details.
 *
 * You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
 * with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
 * 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307 USA
 *
 * Contact information: Zmanda Inc., 465 S. Mathilda Ave., Suite 300
 * Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA, or: http://www.zmanda.com
 */

%perlcode %{

=head1 NAME

Amanda::Cmdline - utilities for handling command lines

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use Amanda::Cmdline;

  my $spec = Amanda::Cmdline::dumpspec_t->new($host, $disk, $datestamp, $level, $write_timestamp);
  print "host: $spec->{'host'}; disk: $spec->{'disk'}\n";

  my @specs = Amanda::Cmdline::parse_dumpspecs(["host", "disk", "date"],
			    $Amanda::Cmdline::CMDLINE_PARSE_DATESTAMP);

=head1 Amanda::Cmdline::dumpspec_t Objects

Note that this class was called C<Amanda::Cmdline::dumpspec_t> in older versions;
that name will still work, but is deprecated.

=head2 Keys

Each key contains a match expression, in the form of a string, or undef.  Note
that the values of these keys are read-only.

=over

=item C<< $ds->{'host'} >>

Hostname

=item C<< $ds->{'disk'} >>

Disk name

=item C<< $ds->{'datestamp'} >>

Dump timestamp.

=item C<< $ds->{'level'} >>

Dump level

=item C<< $ds->{'write_timestamp'} >>

Timestamp when the dump is written to storage media.

=back

=head2 Methods

=over

=item C<< $ds->format() >>

Format the dumpspec as a string.

=back

=head1 Package Functions

=over

=item C<format_dumpspec_components($host, $disk, $datestamp, $level)>

This function returns a string representing the formatted form of the
given dumpspec.  This formatting is the same as performed by
C<< $ds->format() >>, but does not need a C<Dumpspec>.

=item C<parse_dumpspecs([@cmdline], $flags)>

This function parses C<@cmdline> into a list of C<Dumpspec> objects,
according to C<$flags>, which is a logical combination of zero or more
of

 $CMDLINE_PARSE_DATESTAMP - recognize datestamps
 $CMDLINE_PARSE_LEVEL - recognize levels
 $CMDLINE_EMPTY_TO_WILDCARD - if @cmdline is empty, make a wildcard dumpspec

These constants are available in export tag C<:constants>.  The command-line
format is

  [host [disk [datestamp [level [host [..]]]]]]

Note that there is no facility for specifying C<write_timestamp> on the command
line.

=item C<header_matches_dumpspecs($hdr, [@dumpspecs])>

This function compares a header to a list of dumpspecs, returning true if the
header matches at least one dumpspec.  If C<@dumpspecs> is empty, the function
returns false.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<Amanda::Config> handles C<-o> options itself, through
C<config_overrides>.

=cut


%}
