/*
 * Copyright (c) 2009-2012 Zmanda, Inc.  All Rights Reserved.
 *
 * This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
 * under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 2 as published
 * by the Free Software Foundation.
 *
 * This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
 * WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY
 * or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
 * for more details.
 *
 * You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
 * with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
 * 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307 USA
 *
 * Contact information: Zmanda Inc., 465 S. Mathilda Ave., Suite 300
 * Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA, or: http://www.zmanda.com
 */

%perlcode %{

=head1 NAME

Amanda::Util - Runtime support for Amanda applications

=head1 Application Initialization

Application initialization generally looks like this:

  use Amanda::Config qw( :init );
  use Amanda::Util qw( :constants );
  use Amanda::Debug;

  Amanda::Util::setup_application("myapp", "server", $CONTEXT_CMDLINE);
  # .. command-line processing ..
  Amanda::Config::config_init(...);
  Amanda::Util::finish_setup($RUNNING_AS_DUMPUSER);
  # ..
  Amanda::Util::finish_application();

=over

=item setup_application($name, $type, $context)

Set up the operating environment for an application, without requiring
any configuration.

C<$name> is the name of the application, used in log messages, etc.
C<$type> is usualy one of "server" or "client".  It specifies the
subdirectory in which debug logfiles will be created.  C<$context>
indicates the usual manner in which this application is invoked; one
of C<$CONTEXT_CMDLINE> for a user-invoked command-line utility (e.g.,
C<amadmin>) which should send human-readable error messages to stderr;
C<$CONTEXT_DAEMON> for a program started by C<amandad>, e.g.,
C<sendbackup>; or C<$CONTEXT_SCRIPTUTIL> for a small program used from
shell scripts, e.g., C<amgetconf>

Based on C<$type> and C<$context>, this function does the following:

=over

=item *

sets up debug logging;

=item *

configures internationalization

=item *

sets the umask;

=item *

sets the current working directory to the debug or temporary
directory;

=item *

closes any unnecessary file descriptors as a security meaasure;

=item *

ignores C<SIGPIPE>; and

=item *

sets the appropriate target for error messages.

=back

=item finish_setup($running_as_flags)

Perform final initialization tasks that require a loaded
configuration.  Specifically, move the debug log into a
configuration-specific subdirectory, and check that the current userid
is appropriate for this applciation.

The user is specified by one of the following flags, which are
available in export tag C<:check_running_as_flags>:

  $RUNNING_AS_ANY                 # any user is OK
  $RUNNING_AS_ROOT                # root
  $RUNNING_AS_DUMPUSER            # dumpuser, from configuration
  $RUNNING_AS_DUMPUSER_PREFERRED  # dumpuser, but client_login is OK too
  $RUNNING_AS_CLIENT_LOGIN        # client_login (--with-user at build time)

If the flag C<$RUNNING_AS_UID_ONLY> is bit-or'd into
C<$running_as_flags>, then the euid is ignored; this is used for
programs that expect to be setuid-root.

=item finish_application()

Remove old debug files.
All applications should call this before exiting.

=item get_original_cwd()

Return the original current directory with C<get_original_cwd>.

=item version_opt()

Print the version and exit.  This is intended to be used in C<GetOptions> invocations, e.g.,

  GetOptions(
    # ...
    'version' => \&Amanda::Util::version_opt,
  );

=back

=head1 File Handling

These functions read and write the entire requested size to a file
descriptor, even if the underlying syscall returns early.  Note that
they do not operate on Perl file handles.

If fewer than C<$size> bytes are written, C<full_write> returns the
number of bytes actually written and sets C<$!> appropriately.  When
reading, if fewer than C<$size> bytes are read due to a normal EOF,
then C<$!> is zero; otherwise, it contains the appropriate error
message.

Unlike C<POSIX::read>, C<full_read> returns a scalar containing the
bytes it read from the file descriptor.

=over

=item full_read($fd, $size)

=item full_write($fd, $buf, $size)

=back

=head1 Miscellaneous Utilities

=over

=item safe_env()

Return a "safe" environment hash.  For non-setuid programs, this means
filtering out any localization variables.

=item get_fs_usage(file)

This is a wrapper around the Gnulib function of the same name.  On success, it returns
a hash with keys:

  blocksize           Size of a block
  blocks              Total blocks on disk
  bfree               Free blocks available to superuser
  bavail              Free blocks available to non-superuser
  bavail_top_bit_set  1 if fsu_bavail represents a value < 0
  files               Total file nodes
  ffree               Free file nodes

On failure, it returns nothing, and C<$!> should be set.  If C<$!> is 0, then
this is a system which cannot measure usage without a C<disk> argument, which
this wrapper does not support.

=item is_pid_alive(pid)

Return 1 is the process with that pid is still alive.

=item weaken_ref($ref)

This is exactly the same as C<Scalar::Util::weaken>, but available in all
supported versions of perl.

=item gettimeofday()

Return the number of microseconds since the UNIX epoch.

=item fsync($fd)

Invoke the C<fsync> syscall.

=item set_blocking($fd, $blocking)

Set or clear the C<O_NONBLOCK> fd flag on $fd; returns a negative value on
failure, or 0 on success.

=item openbsd_fd_inform()

Due to a particularly poor user-space implementation of threading on OpenBSD,
executables that are run with nonstandard file descriptors open (fd > 2) find
those descriptors to be in a nonblocking state.  This particularly affects
amandad services, which begin with several file descriptors in the 50's open.

This function "informs" the C library about these descriptors by making an
C<fcntl(fd, F_GETFL)> call.  This is otherwise harmless, and is only perfomed
on OpenBSD.

=item built_with_component($comp)

Returns true if Amanda was built with the given component.  Component names are
in C<config/amanda/components.m4>.

=back

=head1 TCP Utilities

These are thin wrappers over functions in C<common-src/stream.h> and other related
functions.

=over

=item stream_server

    my $family = $Amanda::Util::AF_INET;
    my $bufsize = $Amanda::Util::STREAM_BUFSIZE;
    my ($listensock, $port) = Amanda::Util::stream_server(
	    $family, $bufsize, $bufsize, $priv);

This function creates a new socket and binds it to a port, returning both the
socket and port.  If the socket is -1, then an error occurred and is available
in C<$!>.  The constants C<$AF_INET> and C<$STREAM_BUFSIZE> are universally
used when calling this function.  If the final argument, C<$priv>, is true,
then a the function opens a privileged port (below 1024).

=item stream_accept

    my $sock = Amanda::Util::stream_accept(
	    $listen_sock, $timeout, $bufsize, $bufsize);

This function accepts a connection on a listening socket.  If the connection is
not made within C<$timeout> seconds, or some other error occurs, then the
function returns -1.  The bufsize arguments are applied to the new socket.

=item check_security

    my $ok = Amanda::Util::check_security($socket, $userstr);

This function takes a socket descriptor and a string of the form C<"USER foo">
and performs BSD-style checks on that descriptor.  These include verifying
round-trip DNS sanity; check that the user is in C<.rhosts> or C<.amandahosts>,
and checking that the remote port is reserved.  Returns an error string on
error, or C<undef> on success.

=back

=head1 String Utilities

=over

=item quote_string($str)

Quote a string using Amanda's quoting algorithm.  Strings with no
whitespace, control, or quote characters are returned unchanged.  An
empty string is represented as the two-character string C<"">.
Otherwise, tab, newline, carriage return, form-feed, backslash, and
double-quote (C<">) characters are escaped with a backslash and the
string is surrounded by double quotes.

=item unquote_string($str)

Unquote a string as quoted with C<quote_string>.

=item skip_quoted_string($str)

my($q, $remaider) = skip_quoted_string($str)

Return the first quoted string and the remainder of the string, as separated by
any whitespace.  Note that the remainder of the string does not include the
single separating whitespace character, but will include any subsequent
whitespace.  The C<$q> is not unquoted.

=item C<split_quoted_strings($str)>

Split string on unquoted whitespace.  Multiple consecutive spaces are I<not>
collapsed into a single space: C<"x  y"> (with two spaces) parses as C<( "x",
"", "y")>.  The strings are unquoted before they are returned.  An empty string
is split into C<( "" )>.  This method is generally used for parsing IPC messages,
where blank space is significant and well-controlled.

=item C<split_quoted_strings_friendly($str)>

Similar to C<split_quoted_strings>, but intended for user-friendly uses.  In
particular, this function treats any sequence of zero or more whitespace
characters as a separator, rather than the more strict interpretation applied
by C<split_quoted_strings>.  All of the strings are unquoted.

All of these quoting-related functions are available under the export
tag C<:quoting>.

=item hexencode($str)

Encode a string using URI-style hexadecimal encoding.
Non-alphanumeric characters will be replaced with "%xx"
where "xx" is the two-digit hexadecimal representation of the character.

=item hexdecode($str)

Decode a string using URI-style hexadecimal encoding.

Both C<hexencode> and C<hexdecode> are available under the export tag C<:encoding>

=item expand_braced_alternates($str)
=item collapse_braced_alternates(\@list)

These two functions handle "braced alternates", which is a syntax
borrowed, partially, from shells.  Comma-separated strings enclosed in
curly braces expand into multiple alternatives for the entire string.
For example:

  "{foo,bar,bat}"   [ "foo", "bar", "bat" ]
  "foo{1,2}bar"     [ "foo1bar", "foo2bar" ]
  "foo{1\,2,3}bar"  [ "foo1,2bar", "foo3bar" ]
  "{a,b}-{1,2}"     [ "a-1", "a-2", "b-1", "b-2" ]

Note that nested braces are not processed.  Braces, commas, and
backslashes may be escaped with backslashes.

As a special case for numeric ranges, if the braces contain only digits
followed by two dots followed by more digits, and the digits sort in the
correct order, then they will be treated as a sequence.  If the first number in
the sequence has leading zeroes, then all generated numbers will have that
length, padded with leading zeroes.

  "tape-{01..10}"   [ "tape-01", "tape-02", "tape-03", "tape-04",
                      "tape-05", "tape-06", "tape-07", "tape-08",
		      "tape-09", "tape-10" ]

On error, C<expand_braced_altnerates> returns undef.  These two functions are
available in the export tag C<:alternates>.

=item generate_timestamp()

Generate a timestamp from the current time, obeying the
'USETIMESTAMPS' config parameter.  The Amanda configuration must
already be loaded.

=item sanitise_filename($fn)

"Santitises" a filename by replacing any characters that might have special
meaning to a filesystem with underscores.  This operation is I<not> reversible,
and distinct input filenames I<may> produce identical output filenames.

=item unmarshal_tapespec($tapespec)
=item marshal_tapespec($filelist)

These functions convert between a tapespec -- formerly, and confusingly, called
a "tapelist" -- and a perl data structure like

    [	$label1 => [ $filenum1, $filenum2, .. ],
	$label2 => [ $filenum1, $filenum2, .. ],
    ]

Note that a non-tapespec C<$string> will be unmarshalled as C<[ $string, [] ]>.

=back

=head1 Locking Files

Amanda provides a basic mechanism to lock a file and read its contents.  This
uses operating-system facilities to acquire an advisory lock, so non-Amanda
applications are not prevented from modifying the file while it is locked.

To create a lock object, call the C<file_lock> constructor, passing the
filename to lock:

  my $fl = Amanda::Util::file_lock->new($filename)

then, three ways to lock the file:

  $fl->lock_wr();       # take a write lock (exclusive)
  $fl->lock_rd();       # take a read lock
  $fl->lock();	        # take a write lock and reads the contents of
                        # the file into memory.

they return -1 on failure, 0 if the lock is taken or 1 if the lock in not
taken (you can retry later).

to access the data in memory

  my $state = $fl->data();

to change the file contents, call C<write>:

  $fl->write($new_contents);

and unlock the lock with

  $fl->unlock();

Note that the file will be automatically unlocked if the C<file_lock> object is
garbage-collected.

=head1 Simple File Reading & Writing

For reading small files directly into memory with little code
overhead, we can use C<slurp>.

  my $data = slurp $filename;

After processing the data, we can write it back to file with C<burp>.  This
function always completely overwrites the file.

  burp $filename, $header;

These functions can (and should) be exported to the main namespace

=head1 MATCHING

The following functions are available to match strings against patterns using
the rules described in amanda(8):

  match_host($pat, $str);
  match_disk($pat, $str);
  match_datestamp($pat, $str);
  match_level($pat, $str);

=cut

%}
