+++
title = "Release Notes 2.6 Series"
date = 2019-03-23T11:29:47+05:30
weight = 6
chapter = true

+++

*<sub><sub>Amanda.org is an open source site. Please refer the [TO DO LIST](/to_do) to contribute to this site.</sub></sub>*

### Release Notes for 2.6.1p2:
---
* amtapetype: new -p option
* Bug Fixes
  -   S3 device driver
  -   amcheckdump
  -   file not removed from holding disk
  -   sendbackup compatibility with a 2.4.2 server
  -   handle EROFS error from tape device
  -   zfs snapshot name us the diskname
  -   fix fd allocation in amandad
  -   crash in amflush

### Release Notes for 2.6.1p1:
---
* amplot: better output.
* Don't include genversion.h in distribution tarballs.
Bug Fixes

  -   S3 device driver
  -   rait device driver
  -   amstatus
  -   configure
  -   application-api
  -   compilation on some platform
  -   others small bug

### Release Notes for 2.6.1:
---
Application API: Allow to easily write wrappers around any backup
program, See the 'amanda-applications' man page.

-   amgtar: Use GNU tar, it is a lot more configurable than the GNUTAR
    program. See 'amgtar' man page.
-   amstar: Use star to do a backup, it work only on a partition. See
    'amstar' man page.
-   amsamba: Use smbclient to backup a cifs share, see amsamba man page.
-   amzfs-sendrecv: Do a backup of a ZFS filesystem with 'zfs send'.

Script API: Allow to run script before and after amanda process, see the
'amanda-scripts' man page.

-   amzfs-snapshot: Do a snapshot of a ZFS filesystem, then 'amgtar'
    application will backup the snapshot. See 'amzfs-snapshot' man page.
-   script-email: Simple script to send email. see 'script-email' man
    page.

Changer API v2.0: perl-based changer interface supporting concurrent use
of multiple devices and changers.

-   currently operating in "compatibility mode," calling old changer
    shell scripts.
-   under active development.

Xfer API: generic library to move and filter data with maximal
efficiency.

-   can read from and write to arbitrary devices, files, etc.
-   only used in some applications.

Amanda archive format: A simple archive format that an application can
use to create backup image.

'amarchiver' program to manipulate file in amanda archive format.

Many improvements to report better error message to user.

amtape subcommands 'slot prev' and 'slot last' are removed.

Dozens more perl libraries, with more stable interfaces.

Bug fixes and improvements.

amgetconf '--client' option to retrieve config from amanda-client.conf
on a client.

Amanda configuration file changes

-   new application-tool section
-   new script-tool section
-   new device section
-   new changer section

