+++
title = "Release Notes 3.1 Series"
date = 2019-03-23T11:28:09+05:30
weight = 5
chapter = true
+++

*<sub><sub>Amanda.org is an open source site. Please refer the [TO DO LIST](/to_do) to contribute to this site.</sub></sub>*

### Release Notes for the 3.1.x release series:
---
* config
  * The 'rawtapedev' keyword was removed, and the 'label_new_tapes' keyword was deprecated.
  * New warnings for dangerous splitting configurations
* changer
  * We have many changers implementing the new changer API. The new changers are faster, more reliable, and have many new   features. One new features is that the changer keeps track of which label is in which slot, allowing it to locate a     tape faster. But with some changers (new chg-multi or chg-robot without a barcode), it doesn't get automaticaly         notified if you change the volume in a slot. In this case, you must notify the changer of it with the 'amtape update'   command:
     * amtape DailySet1 update 3-8
     * amtape DailySet1 update 3-8=
     * amtape DailySet1 update 3=DailySet003
  * See amanda-changers(7) for more information.
* ndmp, dvdrw
  * New Amanda devices - see amanda-devices(7) for more information.
* amsamba
  * The default amandapass file for the amsamba application is $CONFIG_DIR/amandapass, but it is /etc/amandapass for        program GNUTAR. Don't forget to move the file if you switch to the amsamba application.
* ampgsql, amsuntar, amraw
  * New applications to back up PostgreSQL databases, Solaris systems, and raw device files, respectively.
* amtape
  * Amtape's behavior has changed; see NEWS
* amrmtape
  * Rewritten with new command-line interface; see NEWS
* amdevcheck
  * New --label and --properties options give more information about device
* amreport
  * New, more natural command-line interface (try 'amreport $config')