+++
title = "Release Notes 3.2 Series"
date = 2019-03-23T11:27:06+05:30
weight = 4
chapter = true

+++

*<sub><sub>Amanda.org is an open source site. Please refer the [TO DO LIST](/to_do) to contribute to this site.</sub></sub>*

### Release Notes for 3.2.3:
---
-   fix split arguments and LEOM handling
-   amsuntar: Add SUNTAR-PATH property
-   amstar: Add ACL property
-   amzfs-sendrecv: Implement restore
-   vfs-device (vtapes): LEOM property default to TRUE
-   fix amplot
-   amrecover take correct group when foring amandad with local auth
-   many others small fix

### Release Notes for 3.2.2:
---
-   Do not restore the NUL padding bytes, some program fail with them
-   Fix driver doing nothing if taper crash early
-   Fix taperalog \*FIT no going to second volume
-   Fix amrestore '-p' not going to next file
-   flush even if flush threshold are not met if it save tape space
-   fix crash in amtrmidx due to memory leak
-   amsamba use 'Use smbclient -TF' for restore

### Release Notes for 3.2.1:
---
* barcode are added to the tapelist file
* Faster 'amadmin find', improve speed on many programs
* device-output-buffer-size default to a minimum of 4\*block\_size
* ssh auth use the client-port
* Bug fixed:

  -   "Can't opendata output stream: Connection refused"
  -   Better handling of dump to tape
  -   Corrupted 'amdump' log file, amstatus not showing correct state
  -   Execute subprocess with the config overwrite
  -   tape-device allow to set LEOM
  -   Crash in robot changer
  -   Script output property are not sent to application

### Release Notes for 3.2.0:
---
* Support for multiple simultaneous writes to storage devices

  -   Can write to all available drives in parallel.
  -   Works only with the new changer API.
  -   Useful if two or more volumes are used in a single run.
  -   dump direct to tape can be scheduled any time during the run,
      previously they were done sequencially after all dump to holding
      disk.
  -   enabled with the new 'taper-parallel-write' configuration option.

* Support for LEOM in storage devices

  -   allows splitting without partial parts, saving space.
  -   much more efficient, since parts need not be cached on disk in most
    cases.

* New, simpler splitting commands in the tapetype section

  -   part-size, part-cache-type, part-cache-dir, part-cache-max-size
  -   see amanda.conf(5) for details

* Amanda server configuration file changes (amanda.conf)

  * new configuration keyword:

     -   taper-parallel-write -- How many drive amanda can write to in
         parallel.

  * deprecated configuration keywords:

     -   amrecover\_do\_fsf
     -   amrecover\_check\_label

* The CONFIG parameter to amidxtaped is now required; this means that
  versions of amrecover older than 2.4.3 will be unable to recover from
  servers running Amanda-3.2 and later.

* The new dumptype and global parameters 'recovery-limit' can be used to
  limit which hosts may recover from a particular DLE. See amanda.conf(5)
  and amanda-auth(7) for more information.

* Several old changers have been removed - these changers will work with
  Amanda for the forseeable future, but are no longer included in the
  distribution.

  -   chg-chio
  -   chg-chs
  -   chg-iomega
  -   chg-juke
  -   chg-mcutil
  -   chg-mtx
  -   chg-null (use the new "chg-null:")
  -   chg-rait (use the new "chg-rait:{dev1,dev2}")
  -   chg-rth
  -   chg-scsi-chio
  -   chg-scsi

* Amvault is much improved, but still experimental:

  -   supports assembling split parts on the source volume and
      re-splitting them on the destination
  -   supports filtering dumps with the same syntax as amfetchdump
  -   a --fulls-only option skips all incremental dumps on the source
  -   an --export option tries to move tertiary volumes to import/export
      slots when completed
  -   command-line syntax has changed incompatibly; see manpage or
      'amvault --help'

* Rewritten and improved:

  -   amoverview
  -   amcheckdump

