+++
title = "Release Notes 3.3 Series"
date = 2019-03-23T11:24:59+05:30
weight = 3
chapter = true

+++

*<sub><sub>Amanda.org is an open source site. Please refer the [TO DO LIST](/to_do) to contribute to this site.</sub></sub>*

### Release Notes for 3.3.9:
---

-   new --with-security-file configure option
    -   It set the default security file.
    -   default to /etc/amanda-security.conf
-   security-fix
    -   All previous release of amanda allow the 'amanda' user to
        execute any code as root, and to execute an interactive shell as
        root.
    -   This is a security vulnerability if you do not trust the
        'amanda' user.
    -   There is no need to upgrade if you trust the 'amanda' user and
        the account is secure
        -   good password.
        -   secure xinetd.conf setting.
        -   secure .amandahosts setting.
    -   The 'amanda' user can read all files in the machine, it is what
        a backup program do.
    -   The set of fix disable the abilities to run unwanted code as
        root or to write file anywhere in the filesystem.
-   /etc/amanda-security.conf/etc/amanda-security.conf
    -   A file that contains security setting.
    -   It list all binaries amanda can execute as root.
    -   restore\_by\_amanda\_user
        -   It tell if the 'amanda' user can do restore as root.
        -   It allow the 'amanda' user to write files anywhere in the
            filesystem.
-   amgtar/amstar/ambsdtar/runtar
    -   Disable arguments that can fork program.
    -   Verify the realpath (with symbolic link resolved) is in the
        amanda-security.conf file.
    -   Verify the tar/star/bsdtar realpath program is secure
        -   owned by root and modifiable only by root.
    -   On restore, check the restore\_by\_amanda\_user setting if not
        run by root.

### Release Notes for 3.3.8:
---
-   s3 devices
    -   New NEARLINE S3-STORAGE-CLASS for Google storage.
    -   New AWS4 STORAGE-API
-   amcryptsimple
    -   Works with newer gpg2.
-   amgtar
    -   Default SPARSE value is NO if tar \< 1.28.
    -   Because a bug in tar with some filesystem.
-   amstar
    -   support include in backup mode.
-   ampgsql
    -   Add FULL-WAL property.
-   Many bugs fix.

### Release Notes for 3.3.7p1:
---
-   Fix build in 3.3.7.

### Release Notes for 3.3.7:
---
-   amvault
    -   new --no-interactivity argument.
    -   new --src-labelstr argument.
-   amdump
    -   compute crc32 of the streams and write them to the debug files.
-   chg-robot
    -   Add a BROKEN-DRIVE-LOADED-SLOT property.
-   Many bugs fix.

### Release Notes for 3.3.6:
---
-   ambsdtar
    -   new application that use BSD tar to do the backup.
-   Many bugs fix.

### Release Notes for 3.3.5:
---
-   amtape
    -   faster 'verify' command.
-   fix parsing of config override arguments.
-   amsamba
    -   Add REGEX-MATCH property.
-   amvault
    -   Print progress status.
-   ndmp device
    -   INDIRECT property default to yes.
-   Many bugs fix.

### Release Notes for 3.3.4:
---
-   amreport
    -   new --format argument
    -   new 'json' and 'json\_raw' format.
-   amanda.conf
    -   new REPORT-FORMAT option.
-   amtape
    -   new 'verify' command.
-   amadmin
    -   new 'force-level-1' command.
-   ampgsql
    -   Add VERBOSE property.
-   S3 device
    -   handle DURABLE\_REDUCED\_AVAILABILITY for google storage.
-   Many bugs fix.

### Release Notes for 3.3.3:
---
-   amdump.X log files use timestamp instead of number, amdump and
    amdump.1 are maintained as symlink.
-   chg-disk
    -   Use the changerfile for the statefile.
-   s3 device
    -   Support CASTOR storage
-   amanda.conf
    -   New REPORT-USE-MEDIA and REPORT-NEXT-MEDIA setting.
-   amfetchdump
    -   New --extract, --directory, --data-path and
        --application-property arguments. It allow to do the extraction
        on the server.
-   --exact-match argument to many command, and '=' prefix to
    expression.
    -   It diable use of expression for host, disk, level and datestamp
        on command line argument.
-   All changer scripts.
    -   Add LOCK-TIMEOUT property.
-   Many bug fix

### Release Notes for 3.3.2:
---
-   amgtar
    -   New IGNORE-ZEROS property
-   amsamba
    -   Fix use of subdir for restore
-   s3 device
    -   New PROXY property
    -   New PASSWORD, USERNAME, TENANT\_ID, TENANT\_NAME properties
    -   New STORAGE\_API property
    -   New S3\_MULTI\_DELETE property
    -   New CLIENT\_ID, CLIENT\_SECRET and REFRESH\_TOKEN properties
    -   New CREATE-BUCKET property
    -   New PROJECT-ID property
    -   New REUSE-CONNECTION property
    -   Works with swift and google storage.
-   NDMP device
    -   Add INDIRECT property
-   amanda.conf
    -   Add 'max-warnings', The maximum number of warning lines in the
        report.
    -   Default 'columspec' changed to:
        HostName=0:-12:12,Disk=1:-11:11,Level=1:-1:1,OrigKB=1:-7:0,OutKB=1:-7:0,
        Compress=1:-6:1,DumpTime=1:-7:7,Dumprate=1:-6:1,TapeTime=1:-6:6,
        TapeRate=1:-6:1
-   amadmin
    -   Add --no-default and --print-source arguments for config and
        disklist command.
-   amfetchdump
    -   Print progress.
    -   Add --decrypt, --no-decrypt, --server-decrypt, --client-decrypt,
        --compress, --no-compress, --server-compress and
        --client-compress options.
-   fix for compilation with newer glib
-   fix for compilation on cigwin
-   Many bug fix

### Release Notes for 3.3.1:
---
-   amrecover
    -   new 'settransalte' command
-   amanda.conf
    -   new '\$s' substitution in autolabel
    -   new 'max-dle-by-volume' global option
    -   new 'eject-volume' global option
-   diskfile
    -   new '--client-verbose' argument
-   all programs have a new '--version' argument
-   ampgsql can take property from server configuration
-   amgetconf can print one property of a section.
-   s3 device
    -   new S3\_SERVER\_SIDE\_ENCRYPTION property
    -   use multiple thread to speedup deleting a volume
-   many bug fix

### Release Notes for 3.3.0:
---
-   The default auth is changed to "bsdtcp", if you are using the
    default bsd then you must add it to your configuration:
    -   in amanda.conf
    -   in amanda-client.conf
    -   in dumptype/disklist
    -   in xinetd (if no '-auth' argument to amandad)
-   amdump trap crtl-c, it still send the report and do cleanup if you
    do one crtl-c, do it more than once to abort the run
-   S3 device
    -   use multiple threads to speedup the transfer
    -   can connect to eucalytus and google storage
    -   new NB\_THREADS\_BACKUP property
    -   new NB\_THREADS\_RECOVERY property
    -   new S3\_HOST property
    -   new S3\_SERVICE\_PATH property
    -   new S3\_SUBDOMAIN property
-   chg-aggregate: new changer that use other changer sequentially
-   meta-volume
-   Add meta label in tapelist file
-   chg-disk:
    -   new NUM-SLOT property
    -   new AUTO-CREATE-SLOT property
    -   new REMOVABLE property
    -   new MOUNT property
    -   new UMOUNT property
    -   new UMOUNT-LOCKFILE property
    -   new UMOUNT-IDLE property
-   Change in amanda.conf
    -   new meta-autolabel option
    -   autolabel can include org, config, barcode, meta in the label
    -   new client-name option in appication and script.
-   application and script in amanda-client.conf can be used to set
    default properties for application or script
-   amlabel
    -   The label argument is no longer required, an autolabel can be
        generated
    -   new --meta option
    -   new --barcode option
    -   new --assign option
-   amgtar, amstar: The path must be specified, it will not works with a
    device
-   amrecover: decompression and decryption are now done on the client
    if compression/encryption was done on the client
-   amtape: inventory print the current slot
-   amanda.conf:
    -   autoflush have value "no|yes|all"
    -   script have single-execution setting
    -   Add pre-amcheck, post-amcheck, pre-estimate, post-estimate,
        pre-backup and post-backup to execute-on of script
    -   Add taperscan and interactivity section
    -   add 'server' value in recovery-limit
    -   add dump-limit in a dumptype
-   amanda-client.conf
    -   add amdump-server setting.
-   script are searched in \$APPLICATION\_DIR,
    \$CONFIG\_DIR//application and \$CONFIG\_DIR/application
-   amservice
    -   add -s argument
    -   is also installed on client
-   new amdumpd server service, if enable, it allow client to start a
    backup of itself
-   new amdump\_client program, it is use on client to start a backup of
    itself
-   implement restore command in amzfs-sendrecv, it can be use with
    amrecover

