+++
title = "Release Notes 3.4 Series"
date = 2019-03-23T11:23:30+05:30
weight = 2
chapter = true
+++

*<sub><sub>Amanda.org is an open source site. Please refer the [TO DO LIST](/to_do) to contribute to this site.</sub></sub>*

### Release Notes for 3.4.5:
---
* fix amvault
* fix taper hang
* fix memory leak in amrecover
* fix config parser when -o option
* fix compilation on FreeBSD
* fix planner looping

### Release Notes for 3.4.4:
---
* checkdump
  * Verify all copies of a dump
* diskflat device
  * truncate the file when overwriting a label
* amrecover
  * fix hang
* ambackup
  * allow incremental backup
* tapelist file
  * fix not adding label to tapelist file when creating it
* email interactivity
  * improvement
* S3 device
  * work with openstack keystone V2 (Juno and newer)
* labelstr
  * fix matching a labelstr

### Release Notes for 3.4.3:
---
* fix MAJOR issue: amdump can reuse the same tape in the same run
* amtape slot
  * add drive selection
* compile/link with libressl
* fix portability issue
* fix for NetBSD
* fix 'Device busy' problem
* fix planner crash
* fix setregid call

### Release Notes for 3.4.2:
---
* ambsdtar
  * add a SPARSE property
* amsamba
  * fix for newer samba version
* S3 device
  * fix for '/' in prefix
  * fix for port in S3-HOST
* fix compatibility with older version (2.4.2)
* configure device
  * amanda-security.conf is now in $sysconfdir
* amgetconf
  * add many build. parameter
* fix warning reported by the clang compiler
* fix compilation without SSE4_2 when configure detect it
* amtoc fix
* amlabel -f fix
* many more fixes

### Release Notes for 3.4.1:
---
* new --without-rest-server configure option
* fix reported bugs
  * build issue
  * packaging issue
  * amstar: fix exclude pattern
  * amrecover: do not print the size too often
  * amtapetype: fix error with property_set
  * allow a tapedev in the a storage section
  * amstatus: small fix

### Release Notes for 3.4:
---
* Allow to put a dump on more than one storage
* Allow to specify which DLE/level go to which storage
* amdumpcan dothe vaulting operation (copy from one storage to another one)
* Use shared memory to pass data between processes
* A CRC is computed on the backup image and is verified on restore.
* Run multiple backup inparallel, there is no lock preventing concurrent run.
* Add letter based sequence to autolabel and meta-autolabel.
* And 'includefile' directive for the disklist.
* tapepool, tape are in pool
* amanda.conf (index file can be kept sorted, compressed or uncompressed)
  * compress-index
  * sort-index
* amanda.conf (interface section)
  * add a src-ip setting.
* amanda.conf (dumptype section)
  * add a retry-dump setting.
  * add atag setting.
  * deprecate usetimestamps, it is always "yes"
* amanda.conf (new policy section), define when a tape can be reuse or not.
   A lot more powerful than the tapecycle setting.
  * retention-tapes
  * retention-days
  * retention-recover
  * retention-full
* amanda.conf (new storage section), define how to operate each changer.
  Many old global setting can be set differently for each storage.
  * autoflush
  * autolabel
  * comment
  * device-output-buffer-size
  * dump-selection (select which dle go to that storage)
  * eject-volume
  * erase-on-failure
  * erase-on-full
  * erase-volume
  * flush-threshold-dumped
  * flush-threshold-scheduled
  * interactivity
  * labelstr
  * max-dle-by-volume
  * meta-autolabel
  * policy
  * report-use-media
  * report-next-media
  * runtapes
  * set-no-reuse
  * tapepool
  * taperalgo
  * taperflush
  * taperscan
  * taper-parallel-write
  * tapetype
  * tpchanger

* amanda.conf
  * labelstr can be a new MATCH-AUTOLABEL keyword, labelstr can use the autolabel variable.
  * storage (default storage) You can set multiple storage, all DLEs will be sent to all storages
  * amvault-storage (storage used by amvault)
* amvault
  * deprecated option: --label-template, --dst-changer, --autolabel they must be set in a storage section
  * new --dst-storage option to overwrite the default amvault-storage.
* amlabel
  * new --pool and --storage options.
* amrmtape
  * new --list-retention, --list-no-retention and --remove-no-retention options.
* amtape
  * print the RetentionType in the inventory
* amadmin
  * new 'retention' command'
* amfetchdump
  * --init and --no-restore arguments.
* s3 device
  * New READ-FROM-GLACIER and TRANSITION-TO-GLACIER properties, they allow to transition s3 objects to Glacier.
* tapelist file
  * include POOL, STORAGE and CONFIG
  * you can share the same tapelist file across multiple config.
* amgetconf
  * New --platform argument
  * New --distro argument
* ambackup/ambackupd
  * New client ambackup program to start a backup of the client
  * New server service ambackupd
  * This protocol works even if the client is behind a NAT